# P3

## 1.

### Algorithm

Workflow:

1. Create an array `visited` with the same length as `A`, and set all values to `False`. It would keep track of if the position on `A` has been visited.
2. Set `cur` equal to the initial position.
3. Repeat the following things until return:
   1. If `cur` is the same as our next position (which is `A[cur]`), then return "will stop".
   2. If `visited[cur]` is `True`, it means we are in a loop, return "won't stop".
   3. Else, we set `visited[cur]` to `True`, and set `cur` to the next position.

Written in pseudo code:

```pseudocode
func judgeStop(A, start):
	A_len = A.len()
	visited[A_len] = {False}
	cur = start
	while(cur != A[cur]):
		if(visited[cur] = True):
			return False
		else:
			visited[cur] = True
			cur = A[cur]
	return True
```

We know that the frog will either stop at some point or go into a loop. When the frog will stop, the algorithm obviously works. When the frog will go in to a loop, since the array has a finite size, the loop also has a finite size, and that means the frog will visit a position twice. Therefore the algorithm will also work in this scenario.

### Time Complexity & Space Complexity

In the worst case, my algorithm will traverse the entire array `A` then stop, therefore the time complexity would be $O(n)$.

In terms of space complexity, the additional variables I used are `A_len`, `visited`, and `cur`, and they respectively take up $O(1)$, $O(n)$, and $O(1)$ spaces. Therefore the space complexity in total is $O(n)$.

---

### 2.

### Algorithm

Workflow:

1. Create an array `visited` with the same length as `A`, and set all values to `0`. It would keep track of at which iteration is the position visited.
2. Set `cur` equal to the initial position. Set `cnt = 1`, which is the counter of iteration times.
3. Repeat the following things until return:
   1. If `visited[cur]` isn't `0`, it means we have completed a loop. Therefore we return `cur - visited[cur]`, which is the length of the loop.
   2. Else, we set `visited[cur]` to `cnt`, `cur` to the next position, and add `1` to `cnt`.

Written in pseudo code:

```pseudocode
func getLoopLen(A, start):
	A_len = A.len()
	visited[A_len] = {0}
	cur = start
	cnt = 1
	while(True):
		if(visited[cur] != 0):
			return cnt - visited[cur]
		else:
			visited[cur] = cnt
			cur = A[cur]
			cnt = cnt+1
```

### Time Complexity & Space Complexity

Because there is only one position we would visit twice, the worst time complexity possible would be $O(n)$

In terms of space complexity, the additional variables I used are `A_len`, `visited`, `cur`, and `cnt`, and they respectively take up $O(1)$, $O(n)$, $O(1)$, and $O(1)$ spaces. Therefore the space complexity in total is $O(n)$.

